sāndrānandatano hare nanu purā daivāsure saṅgare
tvatkṛttā api karmaśeṣavaśato ye te na yātā gatim |
teṣāṃ bhūtalajanmanāṃ ditibhuvāṃ bhāreṇa dūrārditā
bhūmi: prāpa viriñcamāśritapadaṃ devai: puraivāgatai: ||1||
sāndra-ānanda-tano	condensed bliss incarnate
hare nanu purā	O Lord! Even long ago
daiva-asure saṅgare	in the battle between the Devas and the Asuras
tvat-kṛttā api	even though slain by Thee
karma-śeṣa-vaśata: ye	because of their residual Karma, those who
te na yātā gatim	they did not attain liberation
teṣāṃ bhūtala-janmanāṃ	and so on this earth were born
ditibhūvāṃ bhāreṇa	of those Asuras (by their) burden
dūrārditā bhūmi:	the tormented earth
prāpa viriñcam-āśrita-padaṃ	approached Brahmaa and sought refuge
devai: purā-eva-āgatai:	the Devas had already reached (there)
O Lord Hari! Condensed bliss incarnate! Long ago, in the battle between the Devas and Asuras, some of the Asuras, even though slain by Thee,did not get liberation because of their residual Karmas. So they were born again on the earth. Mother earth being very much tormented by their burden sought refuge in Brahmaa and reached his abode, where the Devas had already gone.
hā hā durjanabhūribhāramathitāṃ pāthonidhau pātukā-
metāṃ pālaya hanta me vivaśatāṃ sampṛccha devānimān |
ityādipracurapralāpavivaśāmālokya dhātā mahīṃ
devānāṃ vadanāni vīkṣya parito dadhyau bhavantaṃ hare ||2||
hā hā	Alas!
durjana-bhūri-bhāra-mathitāṃ	by the wicked peoples' immense weight, crushed
pāthonidhau pātukām-	into the ocean , about to fall
etāṃ pālaya hanta	this (me) protect, pray!
me vivaśatāṃ sampṛccha	(about) my helplessness ask
devān-imān iti-ādi	these Devas, in this manner
pracura-pralāpa-vivaśām-	much lamenting and helpless
ālokya dhātā mahīṃ	seeing the earth, Brahmaa
devānām vadanāni vīkṣya	and also of the Devas' faces, seeing
parita:	(who had) assembled all around
dadhyau bhavantaṃ	meditated on Thee
hare	O Lord!
Crushed by the immense weight of the evil minded people and about to fall in the ocean of the causal waters, this me please protect. Ask the Devas here of my plight,' the Earth lamented. O Lord! Seeing the Earth in such a helpless state and also looking at the faces of the Devas, who had assembled there, Brahmaa meditated on Thee.
ūce cāmbujabhūramūnayi surā: satyaṃ dharitryā vaco
nanvasyā bhavatāṃ ca rakṣaṇavidhau dakṣo hi lakṣmīpati: |
sarve śarvapurassarā vayamito gatvā payovāridhiṃ
natvā taṃ stumahe javāditi yayu: sākaṃ tavāketanam ||3||
ūce ca-ambujabhū:-	and said Brahmaa
amūn-ayi surā:	to them , O Devas
satyaṃ dharitryā vaca:	true are the Earth's words
nanu-asyā bhavatāṃ ca	indeed hers and yours
rakṣaṇa-vidhau	in the matter of protection
dakṣa: hi lakṣmīpati:	capable alone is Maha Vishnu
sarve śarva-pura:-sarā	all of us led by Shiva
vayam-ita: gatvā	we, from here going
paya:-vāridhiṃ	to the Milk Ocean
natvā taṃ stumahe javāt-	will prostrate before him and sing his praises, quickly
iti yayu: sākaṃ	together (they) went
tava-āketanam	to Thy abode
Presently, the lotus born Brahmaa said to the Devas that what the Mother Earth was saying was indeed true. In the matter of the protection of the Devas and the Earth, Maha Vishnu alone was capable. So all of them and Brahmaa, led by Shiva would quickly go from there to the Milk Ocean and prostrate before Him and sing hymns of his prise. So together they went to Thy abode.
te mugdhānilaśālidugdhajaladhestīraṃ gatā: saṅgatā
yāvattvatpadacintanaikamanasastāvat sa pāthojabhū: |
tvadvācaṃ hṛdaye niśamya sakalānānandayannūcivā-
nākhyāta: paramātmanā svayamahaṃ vākyaṃ tadākarṇyatām ||4||
te	they
mugdha-anila-śāli-	(to the ocean) a pleasant breeze comprising of
dugdha-jaladhe: tīraṃ	to the Milk Ocean's shores
gatā: saṅgatā yāvat-	went, (and when they were) together standing
tvat-pada-cintana-eka-manasa:-	and when on Thy feet their minds were fixed and meditating
tāvat sa pāthojabhū:	then that lotus born Brahmaa
tvat-vācam hṛdaye niśamya	Thy words, in his own heart, hearing
sakalān-ānandayan-	making everyone happy,
ūcivān-ākhyāta:	said, '(I) have been told
paramātmanā svayam-	by the supreme Lord Himself
ahaṃ vākyaṃ	I (have been told) the words,
tat-ākarṇyatām	which please listen'
They together went to the shore of the Milk Ocean where a pleasant breeze was blowing. As they stood there with their minds fixed on Thy feet, meditating, the lotus born Brahmaa in his own heart heard Thy words. Making everyone happy, he told them that he had been spoken to by the Supreme Lord Himself, and asked them to listen to those words.
jāne dīnadaśāmahaṃ diviṣadāṃ bhūmeśca bhīmairnṛpai-
statkṣepāya bhavāmi yādavakule so'haṃ samagrātmanā |
devā vṛṣṇikule bhavantu kalayā devāṅganāścāvanau
matsevārthamiti tvadīyavacanaṃ pāthojabhūrūcivān ||5||
jāne dīna-daśām-ahaṃ	(I) know the sad state
diviṣadāṃ bhūme:-ca	of the gods and of the earth
bhīmai:-nṛpai:-	(caused) by cruel kings
tat-kṣepāya	for its removal
bhavāmi yādava-kule	(I) shall be born in the Yaadava clan
sa:-aham samagra-ātmanā	that Me with all My powers
devā: vṛṣṇikule bhavantu	the gods, in the Vrishni clan, may be born
kalayā	as part incarnation
devāṅganā:-ca-avanau	and also the wives of the Devas, on the earth
mat-sevā-artham-	to serve me
iti tvadīya-vacanam	thus Thy words
pāthojabhū:-ūcivān	Brahmaa told
"I know the sad state of the gods and of the Earth caused by the cruel kings. For its removal I shall be born in the Yaadava clan with all My powers (as a complete incarnation). The gods may be born in the Vrishni clan as part incarnation, and the wives of the Devas also will be born on the Earth to serve me." Thus Thy words Brahmaa told to the Devas and the Earth.
śrutvā karṇarasāyanaṃ tava vaca: sarveṣu nirvāpita-
svānteṣvīśa gateṣu tāvakakṛpāpīyūṣatṛptātmasu |
vikhyāte madhurāpure kila bhavatsānnidhyapuṇyottare
dhanyāṃ devakanandanāmudavahadrājā sa śūrātmaja: ||6||
śrutvā karṇa-rasāyanam	hearing the (words), to the ears nectar like
tava vaca: sarveṣu	Thy words
nirvāpita-svānteṣu-	all of them whose minds were freed from sorrow
īśa gateṣu	O Lord! (they) having gone
tāvaka-kṛpā-	Thy compassion
pīyūṣa-tṛpta-ātmasu	nectar like satiated them
vikhyāte madhurāpure kila	in the famous city of Mathura, it is said,
bhavat-sānnidhya-puṇya-uttare	by Thy presence made more sacred
dhanyāṃ devakanandanām-	the virtuous daughter of Devak
udvahat-rājā sa	married that king
śūrātmaja:	the son of Shoorasena
Hearing Thy compassionate message which was like nectar to their ears they all went away with their minds freed from sorrow, highly delighted and satiated with Thy sweet words. In the famous city of Mathura which is said to be made more sacred by Thy ever presence there, Devaki, the virtuous daughter of Devaka married the king Vasudeva, the son of Shoorasena.
udvāhāvasitau tadīyasahaja: kaṃso'tha sammānaya-
nnetau sūtatayā gata: pathi rathe vyomotthayā tvadgirā |
asyāstvāmatiduṣṭamaṣṭamasuto hanteti hanterita:
santrāsāt sa tu hantumantikagatāṃ tanvīṃ kṛpāṇīmadhāt ||7||
udvāh-avasitau	when the marriage ceremony was over
tadīya-sahaja: kaṃsa:-atha	her (Devaki's) brother, Kansa then
sammānayan-etau	honouring these two (the couple)
sūtatayā gata: pathi rathe	as a charioteer went on the road, in the chariot
vyoma-utthayā tvat-girā	rising in the sky, by Thy voice
asyā:-tvām-ati-duṣṭam-	her, you who are very wicked
aṣṭama-suta: hantā-iti	eighth son will be the killer, thus
hanta-īrita:	alas, was spoken
santrāsat sa tu	out of great fear, he then
hantum-antikagatāṃ tanvīṃ	to kill, who was near by, the beautiful lady
kṛpāṇīm-adhāt	the sword , took
When the marriage ceremony was over Devaki's brother Kansa, in order to honour the couple became their charioteer and took to the road in the chariot. Rising from the sky Thy voice said, "You who are very wicked will be killed by her eighth son." Alas! Thus spoken, out of great fear, he then drew his sword to kill the beautiful lady who was near by.
gṛhṇānaścikureṣu tāṃ khalamati: śaureściraṃ sāntvanai-
rno muñcan punarātmajārpaṇagirā prīto'tha yāto gṛhān |
ādyaṃ tvatsahajaṃ tathā'rpitamapi snehena nāhannasau
duṣṭānāmapi deva puṣṭakaruṇā dṛṣṭā hi dhīrekadā ||8||
gṛhṇāna:-cikureṣu tām	catching hold of her by the hair
khalamati:	the evil minded one (Kansa)
śaure:-ciraṃ sāntvanai:	by Shauri's (Vasudeva's) repeated conciliatory words
no muñcan puna:-	not releasing, again then
ātmaja-arpaṇa-girā	his children offering to surrender, by these words
prīta:-atha yāta: gṛhān	satisfied (he) then went home
ādyaṃ tvat-sahajam	the first born, Thy brother
tathā-arpitam-api	accordingly, though surrendered
snehena na-ahan-asau	out of love,did not kill, this (Kansa)
duṣṭānam-api deva	even in the wicked (people), O Lord!
puṣṭa-karuṇā	great compassion
dṛṣṭā hi dhī:-ekadā	is indeed seen in the heart, once in a while
The evil minded Kansa who had caught hold of Devaki by her hair did not release her in spite of the repeated conciliatory words of Shauri (Vasudeva). Then at the offer of Vasudeva to surrender his children, he was satisfied and went home. The first born Thy brother, though handed over to Kansa as promised, he did not kill the child out of love. For, O Lord! even wicked people are found to be very compassionate in the heart, once in a while.
tāvattvanmanasaiva nāradamuni: proce sa bhojeśvaraṃ
yūyaṃ nanvasurā: surāśca yadavo jānāsi kiṃ na prabho |
māyāvī sa harirbhavadvadhakṛte bhāvī suraprārthanā-
dityākarṇya yadūnadūdhunadasau śaureśca sūnūnahan ||9||
tāvat-tvat-manasā-eva	at that time by Thy will alone
nārada muni:	sage Naarada
proce sa bhojeśvaraṃ	he told the king of Bhoja (Kansa)
yūyaṃ nanu-asurā:	you all are indeed Asuras
surā:-ca yādava:	and Yaadavas are Devas
jānāsi kiṃ na prabho	do you not know O King!
māyāvī sa hari:-	that master of Maayaa, Hari,
bhavat-vadha kṛte	for your killing
bhāvī sura-prārthanāt-	will be born by Devas' prayer
iti-ākarṇya	this hearing
yadūn-adūdhunat-asau	the Yadus, drove out that (Kansa)
śaure:-ca sūnūn-ahan	and Vasudeva's sons killed
At that time, prompted by Thy will alone Naarada Muni told to the king of Bhoja, Kansa, that did he not know that his clan was of Asuras, whereas, the Yaadavas were Devas. Hari, the master of the Maayaa, will be born to kill him, as result of the prayers of the Devas. Hearing this, Kansa drove out the Yadavaas and killed the sons of Vasudeva.
prāpte saptamagarbhatāmahipatau tvatpreraṇānmāyayā
nīte mādhava rohiṇīṃ tvamapi bho:saccitsukhaikātmaka: |
devakyā jaṭharaṃ viveśitha vibho saṃstūyamāna: surai:
sa tvaṃ kṛṣṇa vidhūya rogapaṭalīṃ bhaktiṃ parāṃ dehi me ||10||
prāpte saptama-garbhatām-	entered (the womb of Devaki) at the seventh pregnancy
ahipatau	when the king of serpents (Aadishesha)
tvat-preraṇāt-	by Thy prompting
māyayā nīte	by Yoga Maayaa was taken away
mādhava rohiṇīṃ	O Maadhava! To Rohini's (womb)
tvam-api bho:-	Thou also O!
sat-cit-sukha-eka-ātmaka:	who are Existence Consciousness and Bliss in one soul
devakyā jaṭharaṃ viveśitha	in Devaki's womb entered
vibho saṃstūyamāna: surai:	O Lord! Being well praised by the Devas
sa tvaṃ kṛṣṇa	That Thou O Krishna
vidhūya roga-paṭalīm	removing the host of ailments
bhaktiṃ parāṃ dehi me	supreme devotion bestow to me
At the seventh pregnancy when the king of serpents, Aadishesha entered the womb of Devaki, by Thy prompting, the foetus was transferred to the womb of Rohini by Yoga Maaya. O Maadhava, Thou also who are Existence Consciousness and Bliss alone, entered in Devaki's womb, being well prised by the Devas. O Lord! That Thou O Krishna! removing the host of ailments, bestow to me supreme devotion.